Quantum chemistry add-ons to Density Functional Theory (#237)
FAIRmat-NFDI/nomad-simulations: src/nomad_simulations/schema_packages/utils/libxc/README.md

# LibXC Functional Canonicalization

This module converts **code-specific XC labels** into a **canonical, LibXC-grounded representation**.  
It accepts aliases like `PBE`, hybrids like `B3LYP`, and composite labels such as `PBE0-D3(BJ)+rVV10`, producing normalized components and parameters.

---

## Aim

1. **Unify naming** across codes by resolving to LibXC definitions (`family`, `kind`, `id`).
2. **Make components explicit** (separate exchange/correlation/kinetic terms), deduplicate, and sort deterministically.
3. **Preserve hybrid information** (exact-exchange fraction `α`, range-separation `ω`, SR/LR splits).

> 4. **Handle non-XC extras** (e.g., `D3/D4` dispersion, `VV10/rVV10` nonlocal correlation) consistently.

Reviewer: Pls add an issue for `libvdwxc`. Perhaps somebody elses (likely myself) can take it. This acts as a more hands-on exercise with the utility you built out now.

Reviewer: Added as https://github.com/nomad-coe/nomad-simulations/issues/278

> **Background:**  

> > LibXC is the standard registry for LDA/GGA/meta-GGA and hybrid functionals, identifying them by stable names such as `GGA_X_PBE` and numeric IDs (e.g., 101, 130).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [LibXC](https://libxc.gitlab.io/) is the standard registry for LDA/GGA/meta-GGA and hybrid functionals, identifying them by stable names such as `GGA_X_PBE` and numeric IDs (e.g., 101, 130).  
```

Add a link to the repo.

> > Because LibXC separates exchange and correlation kernels, canonicalization expands all aliases into their X/C parts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The canonicalization here follows the LibXC approach to separating exchange and correlation kernels.
```

But on the NOMAD side we attempt to store them with their full XC name, right?

---

## Input Forms Accepted

> - **Human aliases:** `LDA`, `PW92`, `PBE`, `B3LYP`, `SVWN`, `TPSS`, `SCAN`, `r2SCAN`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Human-readable aliases:** `LDA`, `PW92`, `PBE`, `B3LYP`, `SVWN`, `TPSS`, `SCAN`, `r2SCAN`, etc.
```

Upper-case, collapse whitespace, unify `-` and `_`, and split on delimiters (`+`, `/`, `,`, `-D*`, `+VV10`).

### 2. Alias Expansion → LibXC Components
Aliases are expanded using a curated lookup table (`expand.py`):

| Input Alias | Expanded Components |
|--------------|---------------------|
| `PBE` | `XC_GGA_X_PBE`, `XC_GGA_C_PBE` |
| `SVWN` | `XC_LDA_X`, `XC_LDA_C_VWN` |
| `TPSS` | `XC_MGGA_X_TPSS`, `XC_MGGA_C_TPSS` |

This ensures consistency with LibXC kernels.

### 3. Registry Lookup
Each component is resolved in the LibXC registry to obtain:
- **family** ∈ {`LDA`, `GGA`, `MGGA`, …}  
- **kind** ∈ {`x`, `c`, `k`}  
- **id** → LibXC numeric identifier  

Numeric IDs are preferred for stable identification.

### 4. Hybrid Detection & Parameters
If a functional implies a hybrid (`PBE0`, `HSE06`, `LC-ωPBE`, `CAM-B3LYP`),  
a `hybrid_recipe` is generated with:
- `alpha`: exact exchange fraction (e.g., `0.25` for PBE0)
- `omega`: range-separation parameter
- optional SR/LR partition data if applicable

Parsers can override these when code-level values differ.

### 5. Nonlocal Correlation & Dispersion Add-ons
- `+VV10` / `+rVV10` → stored as **nonlocal correlation** add-ons  

> - `-D3`, `-D3(BJ)`, `-D4`, etc. → routed to **ExplicitDispersionModel**

Reviewer: This is the first time that you mention a NOMAD section.
If I remember well, the rest of the schema is at the level of this utility right? Any reason for this departure here?
